Add a high-level intro to styles in the block editor (#38208)
WordPress/gutenberg: docs/explanations/architecture/styles.md

> ## Styles in the block editor

Reviewer: This is specifically about the styles in the "content" of the block editor, not its UI which can be different right? Should we specify?

Author: https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/38208/commits/f217969cf6490fc145ada824179238c9ebb951a8

This document introduces the main concepts related to styles in the block editor. It points to the relevant reference guides and tutorials for readers to dig deeper into each one of the ideas presented. It's aimed to block authors and people working in the block editor project.

1. HTML and CSS
2. User-provided Block Styles
    - From UI controls to HTML markup
    - Block Supports API
    - Current limits of the Block Supports API

> 3. User-provided Global Styles

Reviewer: Do we need a chapter about "Editor Styles" and how all these theme provided styles get loaded in the editor as well? (in addition to classic.css and reset.css) or is this specifically about frontend?

Author: I see this doc as a "map to the main subsystems" someone needs to be aware of, so not about the frontend. I've added a todo task in the issue description to consider this once the global styles section has a draft.

Author: Upon re-reading the whole document, I think the v1 doesn't need to cover this.

"How styles are enqueued into the editor" is a whole new topic that needs to cover a lot of ground by itself: `add_editor_style(...)`, `add_theme_support('editor-styles')`, `add_theme_support('wp-block-styles'), `reset.css`/`classic.css`, the iframe, `add_filter( 'enqueue_block_editor_assets', ...` and probably some other things I've forgotten. Some of this is already mentioned on [theme support](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/how-to-guides/themes/theme-support/).

### 1. HTML and CSS

By creating a post in the block editor the user is creating a number of artifacts: a HTML document plus a number of CSS stylesheets, either embedded in the document or external.

> On the one hand, the final HTML document is the result of a few things:

Reviewer 2: "On the one hand" and "On the other hand" as an expression, made me think of weighing up two options, rather than two parts of a whole. What about:

`The final HTML document markup is the result of a few things:`

and

`The stylesheets loaded in the front end include:`

Author: Nice one! https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/38208/commits/ac5605868d3bbef9ba44b2cb52ba11a234b6a697

> - the [WordPress templates](https://developer.wordpress.org/themes/basics/template-files/) defined by the theme

Reviewer: we now have two types of themes which might have two different behaviors related to styles, I wonder if that's worth mentioning at this point, maybe not.

Author: In terms of styles (themes with and without theme.json), I'd say we're covered ([see](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/38208/files#diff-ad9a82727f64bc4a98b87a8f43f18a72db4e6fed54f456a0f1b9fe082a0efa72R26)). I've added a note for people to dig into where the templates can come from in https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/38208/commits/861f5eb145af17a13d8fc96327bc2548bc24a296

On the other hand, there's a number of stylesheets being loaded in the front end:

- **Blocks**. The stylesheets that come with the block. In the front end, you can find a single stylesheet with all block styles defined by WordPress (`wp-block-library-*` ) or separate stylesheets per block in use (as in `wp-block-group-*`, `wp-block-columns-*`, etc). See [this note](https://make.wordpress.org/core/2021/07/01/block-styles-loading-enhancements-in-wordpress-5-8/) for the full details.
- **Global styles**. These styles are generated on the fly by using data coming from a theme.json file: see [note](https://make.wordpress.org/core/2021/06/25/introducing-theme-json-in-wordpress-5-8/), [reference](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/theme-json-reference/), and [how to guide](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/how-to-guides/themes/theme-json/). Specifically, it merges the contents of the theme.json coming with WordPress, the theme.json coming with the theme if any, and the user data provided via the global styles sidebar in the site editor. The result of processing this data is visible in the  `global-styles-inline-css` stylesheet.

> - **Theme**. Historically, the themes enqueued their own stylesheets, whose id would be the theme name, as in `twentytwentytwo-style-css`. In addition to having its own styesheets they can now declare a theme.json file whose styles will be part of the global stylesheet.

Reviewer 2: Small typo, and an optional re-wording:

```suggestion
- **Theme**. Historically, themes have enqueued their own stylesheets, where the id is based on the theme name, as in `twentytwentytwo-style-css`. In addition to having their own stylesheets they can now declare a theme.json file containing styles that will be part of the global stylesheet.
```

> - **Other**. WordPress and plugins can also enqueue stylesheets.

Reviewer: There are also styles generated from the content (layout, duotone...) not sure if worth mentioning.

Author: Nice one, https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/38208/commits/c39a5f0c17be23717b5f2af8473587986ee060b1

### 2. User-provided block styles

Since the introduction of the block editor in WordPress 5.0, there were tools for the users to "add styles" to specific blocks. By using these tools, the user would attach new classes or inline styles to the blocks, modifying their visual aspect.

By default, blocks come with a given HTML markup. Think of the paragraph block, for example:

```html
<p></p>
```

In its simplest form, any style rule that targets the `p` selector will apply styles to this block, whether it comes from a block, a theme, etc.

The user may change the state of this block by applying different styles: a text alignment, a color, a font size, a line height, etc. These states are reflected in the HTML markup of the block in the form of HTML attributes, mainly through the `class` or `style` attributes, though it can be any other the block author sees fit.

After some user modifications to the block, the initial markup may become something like this:

```html
<p
	class="has-color has-green-color has-font-size has-small-font-size my-custom-class"
	style="line-height: 1em"
></p>
```

> This is what we refer to as "user-provided block styles". Other names people use are local styles or serialized styles. Essentially, each tool (font size, color, etc) ends up adding some classes and/or inline styles to the block markup. The content of these classes is part of the block, global, or theme stylesheets.

Reviewer 2: Totally optional, but "content" made me think of markup rather than CSS, so I was wondering if the following would work:

```suggestion
This is what we refer to as "user-provided block styles". Other names people use are local styles or serialized styles. Essentially, each tool (font size, color, etc) ends up adding some classes and/or inline styles to the block markup. The CSS styling for these classes is part of the block, global, or theme stylesheets.
```

The ability to modify a block state coupled with the fact that a block can live within any other block (think of a paragraph within a group), creates a vast amount of potential states and style possibilities.

#### From UI controls to HTML markup

If you follow the [block tutorial](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/how-to-guides/block-tutorial/) you can learn up about the different parts of the [block API](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/block-api/) presented here in more detail and also build your own block. This is an introduction to the general concepts of how a block can let users edit its state.

> To build a experience like the one described above a block author needs a few pieces:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To build an experience like the one described above a block author needs a few pieces:
```

> 1. **An UI control**. It presents the user some choices, for example, be able to change the font size of the block. The control takes care of reading the data from the block (does this block has already a font size assigned?) and other data it needs (what are the font sizes an user can use in this block?). See available [component library](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/components/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **A UI control**. It presents the user some choices, for example, to be able to change the font size of the block. The control takes care of reading the data from the block (does this block already have a font size assigned?) and other data it needs (what are the font sizes a user can use in this block?). See available [component library](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/components/).
```

2. **A block attribute**. The block needs to hold data to know which modifications were applied to it: whether it has been given a font size already, for example. See how blocks can define [attributes](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/block-api/block-attributes/).
3. **Access to style data**. A control may need external information about the styles available for a given block: the list of colors, or the list of font sizes, for example. These are called "style presets", as they are a preselection of styles usually defined by the theme, although WordPress provides some defaults. Check the [list of data](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/theme-json-reference/theme-json-living/#settings) a theme can provide to the editor and how a block author can get access to it via [useSetting](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/packages/packages-block-editor/#usesetting).

> 4. **Serialize the user style into HTML markup**. Upon an user action, the block HTML markup needs to be updated accordingly (apply the proper class or inline style). This process is called serialization and it is the [edit, save](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/block-api/block-edit-save/), and [render_callback](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/how-to-guides/block-tutorial/creating-dynamic-blocks/) responsibility: these functions take block data and convert it into HTML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. **Serialize the user style into HTML markup**. Upon a user action, the block HTML markup needs to be updated accordingly (apply the proper class or inline style). This process is called serialization and it is the [edit, save](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/block-api/block-edit-save/), and [render_callback](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/how-to-guides/block-tutorial/creating-dynamic-blocks/) functions' responsibility: these functions take block data and convert it into HTML.
```

In essence, these are the essential mechanics a block author needs to care about for their block to be able to be styled by the user. While this can be done completely manually, there's an API that automates this process for common style needs: Block Supports.

> #### Block Supports API

Author: Sharing feedback I've got privately:

1. Some folks shared interest in going deep down into _how this works_: the filters in use, pointing directly to the code where this happens, etc.
2. Point to the existence of some functions useful in "skip serialization" mode (`__experimentalUseColorProps`, `__experimentalUseBorderProps`, `__experimentalGetSpacingClassesAndStyles`, etc).

I'll incorporate something for the second point directly in this PR.

As for the 1st point. My first instinct was to keep this doc as approachable as possible to block authors, so they don't feel that they need to know how the internals of this API work to implement their blocks. That shouldn't be a requirement. I also understand how that would be useful for core contributors. I'd like to hear thoughts on this, especially from other folks new to this area or that have interacted with this lately.

Reviewer: I felt that the "styles" document might not be the right place to expand on how block supports work. Would it be better if in this document block supports are treated just like any "local/serializable" style and just link to their document for block authors that want to know more about them?

Reviewer: I read the content here for block supports and it does make a lot of sense and have value but maybe it's better moved to the block supports document itself.

Reviewer 3: > Would it be better if in this document block supports are treated just like any "local/serializable" style and just link to their document for block authors that want to know more about them?

This sounds like a good idea. Block supports are still in development, so the docs might need a roomy home. 

It's probably still relevant to this doc to emphasise that many block supports add inline styles to block containers, and that they're rendered to the page with the block.

Author: I won't add any further to "how block supports" work and the utility functions in use. This can be done in a different PR and probably can go in the block supports docs.

[Block supports](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/block-api/block-supports/) is an API that allows a block to declare what features it supports. By adding some info to their [block.json file](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/block-api/block-metadata/), the block tells the system what kind of actions a user can do to it.

For example:

```json
{
  "name": "core/paragraph", 
  "...": "...",
  "supports": {
	"typography": {
		"fontSize": true
	}
  }
}
```

> In its `block.json`, the paragrah block declares support for font size. It means that there will be an UI control available for users to tweak the font size of that particular block. The system will take care of setting up the UI control data (the font size of the block if it has one already assigned, the list of available font sizes to show), and will serialize the block data into HTML markup upon user changes (attach classes and inline styles appropiately).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In its `block.json`, the paragrah block declares support for font size. It means that there will be a UI control available for users to tweak the font size of that particular block. The system will take care of setting up the UI control data (the font size of the block if it has one already assigned, the list of available font sizes to show), and will serialize the block data into HTML markup upon user changes (attach classes and inline styles appropriately).
```

> In its `block.json`, the paragrah block declares support for font size. It means that there will be an UI control available for users to tweak the font size of that particular block. The system will take care of setting up the UI control data (the font size of the block if it has one already assigned, the list of available font sizes to show), and will serialize the block data into HTML markup upon user changes (attach classes and inline styles appropiately).

Reviewer 4: > In its `block.json`, the paragrah block declares support for font size. It means that there will be an UI control available for users to tweak the font size of that particular block.

Is it worth clarifying this statement given the display of the UI control is also dependent on the theme.json not disabling it?

Author: https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/38208/commits/a721384d0be2c5d9e12325824dd304131ad4c405

> By using the block supports mechanism via `block.json`, the block author is able to create the same experience than before just by writing a couple of lines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By using the block supports mechanism via `block.json`, the block author is able to create the same experience as before just by writing a couple of lines.
```

> Besides the obvious advantage of having to do less work to achieve the same results, there's a few other advantages:

Reviewer 2: Tiny nit: because we're including a document here for folks who mightn't already know about the concepts, shall we remove the word `obvious`? Also switched to `benefit` to avoid repetition.

```suggestion
Besides the benefit of having to do less work to achieve the same results, there's a few other advantages:
```

```html
<table>
  <thead><tr><th>Header</th></tr></thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr><th>First</th></tr>
    <tr><th>Second</th></tr>
  </tbody>
  <tfoot>
    <tr><th>Footer</th></tr>
  </tfoot>
</table>
```

1. **Only one style type per block.**

One of the limitations is that, from all the [styles available](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/block-api/block-supports/), there can be only one instance of any them in use by the block. Following the example, the table block can only have a single font size. If the block author wanted to have three different font sizes (head, body, and footer) it can't do it using the current block supports API. See [this issue](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/issues/33255) for more detailed info and ways forward.

2. **Styles are serialized to the outermost HTML node of the block, the wrapper.**

The Block Supports API only serializes the font size value to the wrapper, resulting in the following HTML `<table class="has-small-font-size">` . The current block supports API doesn't serialize this value to a different node, for example, the `<tbody>`.

> This is an active area of work you can follow [in the tracking issue](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/issues/38167). The linked proposal is exploring a different way to serialize the user changes: instead of each block support serializing its own data (for example, classes such as `has-small-font-size`, `has-green-color`) the idea is the block would get a single class instead (for example, `wp-style-UUID`) and the contents of that class will be generated in the server by WordPress.

Reviewer 2: As above, switch `contents` to refer specifically to CSS styling:

```suggestion
This is an active area of work you can follow [in the tracking issue](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/issues/38167). The linked proposal is exploring a different way to serialize the user changes: instead of each block support serializing its own data (for example, classes such as `has-small-font-size`, `has-green-color`) the idea is the block would get a single class instead (for example, `wp-style-UUID`) and the CSS styling for that class will be generated in the server by WordPress.
```

> While work continues in that proposal, there's a scape hatch, an experimental option block authors can use. Any block support can skip the serialization to HTML markup by using  `__experimentalSkipSerialization`. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While work continues in that proposal, there's an escape hatch, an experimental option block authors can use. Any block support can skip the serialization to HTML markup by using  `__experimentalSkipSerialization`. For example:
```

> While work continues in that proposal, there's a scape hatch, an experimental option block authors can use. Any block support can skip the serialization to HTML markup by using  `__experimentalSkipSerialization`. For example:

Reviewer 4: > Any block support can skip the serialization to HTML markup by using `__experimentalSkipSerialization`.

I think it is worth warning block authors here of further limitations when skipping serialization of block support styles. 

When skipping serialization, normally so certain styles can be applied to inner elements, you often run into the problem where the styles generated via theme.json will not target that inner element and the elements API isn't yet sufficient to be a solution either. 

This is most highlighted by a use case where a block author needs multiple block support toolsets, e.g. spacing (especially padding), typography, and color, with one set applied on the main block wrapper and another targeting an inner element. In such a case, the block author cannot rely on the single selector available within the block.json configuration to match multiple targets. 

An illustration of the [above use case is the Search block](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/issues/32417).

Author: That's a good point. I'm working on the global styles doc and will revisit this after to see what we can do.

Author: Added a note about this at "current limits of global styles > Can't target different parts of the block". Going to resolve this. Please, bring any improvements to that in the own section itself.

```
{
  "name": "core/paragraph", 
  "...": "...",
  "supports": {
	"typography": {
		"fontSize": true,
		"__experimentalSkipSerialization": true
	}
  }
}
```

> This means that the font size block supports will do all of the things (create an UI control, bind the block attribute to the control, etc) except serializing the user values into the HTML markup. The classes and inline styles will not be automatically applied to the wrapper and is the block author responsibility to implement this in the `edit`, `save`, and `render_callback` functions. See [this issue](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/issues/28913) for examples of how it was done for some blocks provided by WordPress.

Reviewer 2: The `__experimentalSkipSerialization` here occurs at the block support level (`typography`) rather than the individual feature within that block support, so I've added a suggestion:

```suggestion
This means that the typography block support will do all of the things (create a UI control, bind the block attribute to the control, etc) except serializing the user values into the HTML markup. The classes and inline styles will not be automatically applied to the wrapper and it is the block author's responsibility to implement this in the `edit`, `save`, and `render_callback` functions. See [this issue](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/issues/28913) for examples of how it was done for some blocks provided by WordPress.
```

Reviewer 4: There is currently an open PR to [allow skipping serialization of individual block support features.](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/36293). It shouldn't be too far off landing 🤞

Reviewer 2: Oh, thanks @aaronrobertshaw, I totally forgot about that one! 🙇

Author: https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/38208/commits/fd395d425fdfa2a1b8fca7bf836cd3198c32f1b8

1. HTML and CSS
2. Block styles
  - From UI controls to HTML markup
  - Block Supports API
  - Current limits of the Block Supports API
3. Global styles
  - Gather data
  - Consolidate data
  - From data to styles
  - Current limits of the Global styles API

### 1. HTML and CSS

By creating a post in the block editor the user is creating a number of artifacts: a HTML document plus a number of CSS stylesheets, either embedded in the document or external.

The final HTML document is the result of a few things:

- the [WordPress templates](https://developer.wordpress.org/themes/basics/template-files/) provided by the theme, either via PHP (classic theme) or via HTML templates (block theme) ([learn more](https://developer.wordpress.org/themes/block-themes/#differences-and-similarities-between-classic-themes-and-block-themes) about the differences)
- the [blocks](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/core-blocks/) and patterns in use that come with a predefined structure (HTML markup)

> - the user modifications to the content: adding content, transforming existing content (convert a given paragraph into a heading), or modifying it (attaching a class or inline styles to a block)

Reviewer 5: Since we're talking about `final`, it feels to me okay not to mention `transforming`.

The stylesheets loaded in the front end include:

- **Blocks**. The stylesheets that come with the block. In the front end, you can find a single stylesheet with all block styles defined by WordPress (`wp-block-library-*` ) or separate stylesheets per block in use (as in `wp-block-group-*`, `wp-block-columns-*`, etc). See [this note](https://make.wordpress.org/core/2021/07/01/block-styles-loading-enhancements-in-wordpress-5-8/) for the full details.

> - **Global styles**. These styles are generated on the fly by using data coming from a theme.json file: see [note](https://make.wordpress.org/core/2021/06/25/introducing-theme-json-in-wordpress-5-8/), [reference](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/theme-json-reference/), and [how to guide](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/how-to-guides/themes/theme-json/). Specifically, it merges the contents of the theme.json coming with WordPress, the theme.json coming with the theme if any, and the user data provided via the global styles sidebar in the site editor. The result of processing this data is visible in the  `global-styles-inline-css` stylesheet.

Reviewer 5: Or some similar rewording?

```suggestion
- **Global styles**. These styles are generated on the fly by using data coming from a theme.json file: see [note](https://make.wordpress.org/core/2021/06/25/introducing-theme-json-in-wordpress-5-8/), [reference](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/theme-json-reference/), and [how to guide](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/how-to-guides/themes/theme-json/). Specifically, it merges the contents of the theme.json from WordPress, the theme.json from the theme - if any, and the user data provided via the global styles sidebar in the site editor. The result of processing this data is visible in the  `global-styles-inline-css` stylesheet.
```

Also the `global-styles-inline-css` is inlined in the page. Should we clarify? Initially I was looking at the requests made in dev tools to find it.

> - **Theme**. Historically, themes have enqueued their own stylesheets, where the id is based on the theme name, as in `twentytwentytwo-style-css`. In addition to having their own stylesheets they can now declare a theme.json file containing styles that will be part of the global stylesheet.

Reviewer 5: `global stylesheet` maybe say that this will be handled from the above? `global` being part of the term `global styles` can create just a bit uncertainty.

- **Other**. WordPress and plugins can also enqueue stylesheets.

### Block styles

Since the introduction of the block editor in WordPress 5.0, there were tools for the users to "add styles" to specific blocks. By using these tools, the user would attach new classes or inline styles to the blocks, modifying their visual aspect.

By default, blocks come with a given HTML markup. Think of the paragraph block, for example:

```html
<p></p>
```

In its simplest form, any style rule that targets the `p` selector will apply styles to this block, whether it comes from a block, a theme, etc.

The user may change the state of this block by applying different styles: a text alignment, a color, a font size, a line height, etc. These states are reflected in the HTML markup of the block in the form of HTML attributes, mainly through the `class` or `style` attributes, though it can be any other the block author sees fit.

After some user modifications to the block, the initial markup may become something like this:

```html
<p
	class="has-color has-green-color has-font-size has-small-font-size my-custom-class"
	style="line-height: 1em"
></p>
```

> This is what we refer to as "user-provided block styles". Other names people use are local styles or serialized styles. Essentially, each tool (font size, color, etc) ends up adding some classes and/or inline styles to the block markup. The CSS styling for these classes is part of the block, global, or theme stylesheets.

Reviewer 5: Regarding `Other names people use are` it might be better to be in the same sentence with the first term(`user-provided block styles`). I had to think a bit what it was saying.

The ability to modify a block state coupled with the fact that a block can live within any other block (think of a paragraph within a group), creates a vast amount of potential states and style possibilities.

#### From UI controls to HTML markup

If you follow the [block tutorial](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/how-to-guides/block-tutorial/) you can learn up about the different parts of the [block API](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/block-api/) presented here in more detail and also build your own block. This is an introduction to the general concepts of how a block can let users edit its state.

To build an experience like the one described above a block author needs a few pieces:

1. **A UI control**. It presents the user some choices, for example, to be able to change the font size of the block. The control takes care of reading the data from the block (does this block already have a font size assigned?) and other data it needs (what are the font sizes a user can use in this block?). See available [component library](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/components/).

> 2. **A block attribute**. The block needs to hold data to know which modifications were applied to it: whether it has been given a font size already, for example. See how blocks can define [attributes](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/block-api/block-attributes/).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. **A block attribute**. The block needs to hold data to know which modifications were applied to it: whether it has been given a font size already for example. See how blocks can define [attributes](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/block-api/block-attributes/).
```

By using the block supports mechanism via `block.json`, the block author is able to create the same experience as before just by writing a couple of lines.

Besides the benefit of having to do less work to achieve the same results, there's a few other advantages:

- the style information of the block becomes available for the native mobile apps and in the server
- the block will use the UI controls other blocks use for the same styles, creating a more coherent user experience
- the UI controls in use by the block will be automatically updated as they are improved, without the block author having to do anything

> #### Current limits of the Block Supports API

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#### Current limitations of the Block Supports API
```

```
{
  "name": "core/paragraph", 
  "...": "...",
  "supports": {
	"typography": {
		"fontSize": true,
		"__experimentalSkipSerialization": true
	}
  }
}
```

This means that the typography block support will do all of the things (create a UI control, bind the block attribute to the control, etc) except serializing the user values into the HTML markup. The classes and inline styles will not be automatically applied to the wrapper and it is the block author's responsibility to implement this in the `edit`, `save`, and `render_callback` functions. See [this issue](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/issues/28913) for examples of how it was done for some blocks provided by WordPress.

Note that, once `__experimentalSkipSerialization` is enabled for a group (typography, color, spacing) it affects all block supports within this group (font size, line height, and font family within typography, and so on). There's [ongoing work](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/36293) to be able to disable block supports individually, you can follow that issue to check the status.

### 3. Global styles

> Global Styles refers to a mechanism that generates site-wide styles. Unlike the block styles described in the previous section, these are not serialized into the post content, they're not attached to the block HTML. Instead, the output of this system is a new stylesheet with id `global-styles-inline-css`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Global Styles refers to a mechanism that generates site-wide styles. Unlike the block styles described in the previous section, these are not serialized into the post content and are not attached to the block HTML. Instead, the output of this system is a new stylesheet with id `global-styles-inline-css`.
```

This mechanism was [introduced in WordPress 5.8](https://make.wordpress.org/core/2021/06/25/introducing-theme-json-in-wordpress-5-8/). At the time, it only took data from WordPress and the active theme. WordPress 5.9 expanded the system to also take style data from users.

This is the general data flow:

![global-styles-input-output](./assets/global-styles-input-output.png)

The process of generating the stylesheet has, in essence, three steps:

> 1. Gather data: the `theme.json` file [bundled with WordPress](https://github.com/WordPress/wordpress-develop/blob/trunk/src/wp-includes/theme.json)), the `theme.json` file of the active theme if it exists, and the user's styles provided via the global styles UI in the site editor.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1. Gather data: the `theme.json` file [bundled with WordPress](https://github.com/WordPress/wordpress-develop/blob/trunk/src/wp-includes/theme.json), the `theme.json` file of the active theme if it exists, and the user's styles provided via the global styles UI in the site editor.
```

> 2. Consolidate data: the structured information coming from different origins -WordPress defaults, theme, and user- is normalized and merged into a single structure.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Consolidate data: the structured information from different origins -WordPress defaults, theme, and user- is normalized and merged into a single structure.
```

3. Convert data into a stylesheet: convert the internal representation into CSS style rules and enqueue them as a stylesheet.

#### Gather data

The data can come from three different origins: WordPress defaults, the active theme, or the user. All three of them use the same [`theme.json` format](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/theme-json-reference/).

 Data from WordPress and the active theme is retrieved from the corresponding `theme.json` file. Data from the user is pulled from the database, where it's stored after the user saves the changes they did via the global styles sidebar in the site editor.

#### Consolidate data

The goal of this phase is to build a consolidated structure.

> There's two important processes going on in this phase. First, the system needs to normalize all the incoming data, as different origins may be using different versions of the `theme.json` format. For example, a theme may be using [v1](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/theme-json-reference/theme-json-v1/) while the WordPress base is using [the latest version](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/theme-json-reference/theme-json-living/). Second, the system needs to decide how to merge the input into a single structure. This will be the focus of the the following sections.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are two important processes going on in this phase. First, the system needs to normalize all the incoming data, as different origins may be using different versions of the `theme.json` format. For example, a theme may be using [v1](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/theme-json-reference/theme-json-v1/) while the WordPress base is using [the latest version](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/theme-json-reference/theme-json-living/). Second, the system needs to decide how to merge the input into a single structure. This will be the focus of the following sections.
```

For example, if we have the following `theme.json` structures coming from WordPress, the theme, and the user respectively:

```json
{
  "settings": {
    "color": {
      "palette": [ <WordPress values> ],
      "gradients": [ <WordPress values> ]
	}
  }
}
```

```json
{
  "settings": {
    "color": {
      "palette": [ <theme values> ]
	},
    "typography": {
      "fontFamilies": [ <theme values> ]
	}
  }
}
```

```json
{
  "settings": {
    "color": {
      "palette": [ <user values> ]
	}
  }
}
```

The result after the consolidation would be:

```json
{
  "settings": {
    "color": {
      "palette": {
        "default": [ <WordPress values> ],
        "theme": [ <theme values> ],
        "user": [ <user values> ]
	  },
	  "gradients": {
        "default": [ <WordPress values> ]
	  }
    },
    "typography": {
      "fontFamilies": {
        "theme": [ <theme values> ]
	  }
	}
  }
}
```

#### From data to styles

The last phase of generating the stylesheet is converting the consolidated data into CSS style rules.

##### Styles to CSS rules

> The `styles` section can be thought as a structured representation of CSS rules, each chunk representing a CSS rule:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `styles` section can be thought of as a structured representation of CSS rules, each chunk representing a CSS rule:
```

- A key/value in theme.json maps to a CSS declaration (`property: value`).
- The CSS selector for a given chunk is generated based on its semantics:
	- The top-level section uses the `body` selector.

> 	- The top-level elements use a ID selector matching the HTML element they represent (for example, `h1` or `a`).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	- The top-level elements use an ID selector matching the HTML element they represent (for example, `h1` or `a`).
```

	- Blocks use the default class name they generate (`core/group` becomes `.wp-block-group`) unless they explicitly set a different one using their `block.json` (`core/paragraph` becomes `p`). See the "Current limits" section for more about this.
	- Elements within a block use the concatenation of the block and element selector.

For example, the following `theme.json` structure:

```json
{
  "styles": {
    "typography": {
      "fontSize": <top-level value>
	},
    "elements": {
      "h1": {
        "typography": {
          "fontSize": <h1 value>
		}
	  }
	},
	"blocks": 
      "core/paragraph": {
        "color": {
          "text": <paragraph value>
		}
	  }
      "core/group": {
        "color": {
          "text": <group value>
		},
		"elements": {
          "h1": {
            "color": {
              "text": <h1 within group value>
			}
		  }
		}
	  },
	}
  }
}
```

is converted to the following CSS:

```css
body {
  font-size: <top-level value>;
}
h1 {
  font-size: <h1 value>;
}
p {
  color: <paragraph value>;
}
.wp-block-group {
  color: <group value>;
}
.wp-block-group h1 {
  color: <h1 within group value>;
}
```

##### Settings to CSS rules

> From the `settings` section, all the values of any given presets will be converted to a CSS Custom Property that follows this name structure: `--wp--preset--<category>-<slug>`. The selectors follow the same rules described in the styles section above.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
From the `settings` section, all the values of any given presets will be converted to a CSS Custom Property that follows this naming structure: `--wp--preset--<category>-<slug>`. The selectors follow the same rules described in the styles section above.
```

}
```

In addition to the CSS Custom Properties, all presets but duotone generate CSS classes for each value. The example above will generate the following CSS classes as well:

```CSS
/* vivid-red */
.has-vivid-red-color { color: var(--wp--preset--color--vivid-red) !important; }
.has-vivid-red-background-color { background-color: var(--wp--preset--color--vivid-red) !important; }
.has-vivid-red-bordfer-color { border-color: var(--wp--preset--color--vivid-red) !important; }

/* foreground */
.has-foreground-color { color: var(--wp--preset--color--foreground) !important; }
.has-foreground-background-color { background-color: var(--wp--preset--color--foreground) !important; }
.has-foreground-border-color { border-color: var(--wp--preset--color--foreground) !important; }

/* foreground within site title*/
.wp-block-site-title .has-foreground-color { color: var(--wp--preset--color--foreground) !important; }
.wp-block-site-title .has-foreground-background-color { background-color: var(--wp--preset--color--foreground) !important; }
.wp-block-site-title .has-foreground-border-color { border-color: var(--wp--preset--color--foreground) !important; }
```

> #### Current limits of the Global Styles API

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#### Current limitations of the Global Styles API
```

> ##### Set a different CSS selector for blocks requires server-registration

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
##### Setting a different CSS selector for blocks requires server-registration
```

> By default, the selector asigned to a block is `.wp-block-<block-name>`. However, blocks can change this should they need. They can provide a CSS selector via the `__experimentalSelector` property in its `block.json`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By default, the selector assigned to a block is `.wp-block-<block-name>`. However, blocks can change this should they need. They can provide a CSS selector via the `__experimentalSelector` property in its `block.json`.
```

If blocks do this, they need to be registered in the server using the `block.json`, otherwise, the global styles code doesn't have access to that information and will use the default CSS selector for the block.

##### Can't target different parts of the block

Every chunk of styles can only use a single selector.

> This is particularly relevant if the block is using `__experimentalSkipSerialization` to serialize the different style properties to different nodes other than the wrapper. See "Current limits of blocks supports" for more.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This is particularly relevant if the block is using `__experimentalSkipSerialization` to serialize the different style properties to different nodes other than the wrapper. See "Current limitations of blocks supports" for more.
```

##### Only a single property per block

> Similarly to block supports, there can be only one instance of any style in use by the block. For example, the block can only have a single font size. See related "Current limits of block supports".

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Similarly to block supports, there can be only one instance of any style in use by the block. For example, the block can only have a single font size. See related "Current limitations of block supports".
```
